docs-gen/content/rule_set/data_entry/data_units.md, before:

---
title: "Data Units"
date: 2019-08-04T12:36:12+02:00
weight: 20
---

## Introduction to Data Units in VSS

It is in VSS possible for signals to specify a unit of measurement from a list of predefined data units.
For most signals in the VSS standard catalog, a data unit has been selected. A typical example is `Vehicle.Speed`, as shown below.

```yaml
Vehicle.Speed:
  datatype: float
  type: sensor
  unit: km/h
  description: Vehicle speed.
```

The ambition when selecting data unit for signals in VSS standard catalog has been to use either a unit based on SI-units,
or a unit commonly used within the vehicle industry. For the `Vehicle.Speed` example above this means that `km/h` has been selected,
even if `m/s` from an SI-perspective would have been a better choice.

It must be noted that the selected unit does not imply that the value of `Vehicle.Speed` always needs to be sent or visualized
as `km/h` (with float as datatype). A user interface or API may show or request vehicle speed in any unit it likes,
and a transport protocol may send speed in another unit, possibly also involving scaling and offset.
But in protocols not explicitly specifying data units (like [VISS](https://raw.githack.com/w3c/automotive/gh-pages/spec/VISSv2_Core.html))
it is expected that `Vehicle.Speed` is sent and received as `km/h` (without scaling or offset).
However since units define possible `allowed-datatypes` the given `datatype` has to match the allowed ones.

VSS does not offer any syntax for defining alternative units for a specific signal.
The VSS project has specified for all units a corresponding quantity e.g. `velocity` for `km/h`.
An API may use the quantity information to identify alternative units that can be used to represent the signal.
The VSS list of units does not specify conversion factors, so even if VSS list both `km/h` and `m/s` as units for
the quantity `velocity`, it is not specified how they relate to each other.

In some cases it is natural to omit the data unit. This concerns typically signals where datatype `string` is used,
but also signals where the value just represents a number (dimensionless quantities), like in the example below:

```yaml
Vehicle.Cabin.DoorCount:
  datatype: uint8
  type: attribute
  default: 4
  description: Number of doors in vehicle.
```

### Logical Data Units

VSS supports `percent` as data unit, typically with 0 to 100% as the allowed range.
In some cases, the definition on how to calculate the signal value is obvious, like for `Vehicle.Powertrain.FuelSystem.Level`
below. It is likely that all VSS users will calculate fuel level in the same way, i.e. the meaning of a fuel level of 50%
is well agreed, the liters of fuel in the tank is exactly 50% of nominal capacity.

```yaml
Vehicle.Powertrain.FuelSystem.Level:
  datatype: uint8
  type: sensor
  unit: percent
  min: 0
  max: 100
  description: Level in fuel tank as percent of capacity. 0 = empty. 100 = full.

```

In other cases, the formula for calculating the signal is not obvious and is not specified in VSS. A typical example is shown below for clutch wear.
While most VSS users likely can agree that a brand new clutch shall have 0 as "ClutchWear",
the exact formula for calculating clutch wear for a used clutch will likely be vehicle specific.
Some vehicles might monitor actual wear, others might estimate it based on vehicle usage.
This is in VSS called a logical range, a VSS user knows what range to use but are free to define the formula for calculating the value.
Values from different vehicles (of different make/model) can not always be compared, as the formula used for calculation may differ.

```yaml
Vehicle.Powertrain.Transmission.ClutchWear:
  datatype: uint8
  type: sensor
  unit: percent
  max: 100
  description: Clutch wear as percent. 0 = no wear. 100 = worn.
```

## Supported Data Units in VSS Standard Catalog

The VSS syntax does not in itself specify what units can be used, the unit attribute as declared for signals in *.vspec files is optional and can contain an arbitrary string value.
[VSS-Tools](https://github.com/COVESA/vss-tools) however require that all units used are defined
and therefore is also a requirement for signals in the VSS standard catalog.
Units are defined by including them in a unit file with syntax as described below.
One or more unit files can be specified by the `-u` parameter and, if not given, the tools search for a file `units.yaml`
in the same directory as the root *.vspec file.

For the VSS standard catalog the VSS-project has defined a set of units that can be used for signals in the VSS standard catalog.
This list is composed of definitions according to International Units (SI) and few automotive-specific units:
[Specification](https://www.iso.org/standard/30669.html), [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units).
It can be noted that not all units in the list are currently used by the VSS standard catalog,
but they may be used in the future or may be used for customization of the VSS catalog.

The VSS list of units for the standard catalog exists in [units.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml).

### Addition of new Data Units to VSS standard catalog

The [list of units](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml) in VSS standard catalog
is not static. New units can be added if needed for signals in the VSS standard catalog, or if the VSS-project considers that
the unit might be useful for customization of the VSS tree. If you would like to propose a new unit to be added to the list
please create a pull request where the new unit is added to
[units.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml).

If the unit is needed for a new signal in the VSS standard catalog you can propose the new signal and the new unit
in the same Pull Request.

## Unit file syntax

Unit files follow the syntax defined below:

```
[
 <vss-unit-identifier>: # Typically unit abbreviation, like km/h or mm, but no special characters
    definition: <string>
    [unit: <string>] # Full name of unit, optional, if not given assumed to be equal to vss-unit-identifier
    quantity: <string> # Quantity of the unit.
    [allowed-datatypes] : ['numeric', 'string', uint8', ...]] # Allowed datatypes in VSS standard catalog
    [deprecation: <reason>]
]*
```

The VSS term `quantity` corresponds roughly to the term `quantity` as defined in for example ISO 80000.
Typical example are `length`, `mass` and `velocity` that all can be expressed in SI-units.
However, from a VSS perspective quantities do not need to correspond to physical quantities.
It could be an arbitrary term, but it is generally expected that it is possible to convert between values
using different units but defined with the same quantity.

Example:

```yaml
m:
  definition: Length measured in meters
  unit: meter
  quantity: length
  allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']

mm:
  definition: Length measured in millimeters
  unit: millimeter
  quantity: length
  allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']
```

As `m` and `mm` are defined with the same quantity it is expected that you can convert a value from `m` to `mm`.

The `allowed-datatypes` attributes can be used to specify which VSS datatypes can contain values of a particular unit.
For most units the symbolic datatype `numeric` meaning any float or integer datatype can be used.
As an example, both `uint8` and `float` can be used to represent a length value.
If using `uint8` you will have range restrictions, but that might be acceptable for some signals.
For some units more specific datatype restrictions are relevant. Some examples:

* A date/time expressed in ISO 8061 format (`unit: iso8601`) can only be represented as a string
* A UNIX Timestamp signal (`unit: unix-time`) must be at least 32 bit unsigned to be able to handle date/time after year 2038.

The `deprecation` keyword can be used to indicate that a specific unit may be removed in the future.
Tooling shall preferably give a warning if a signal uses a deprecated unit or the unit used belongs to a deprecated quantity.
The reason should preferably list when and why the unit is deprecated, a hypothetical example is given below:

```yaml
  inch:
    definition: Distance measured in inches
    unit: inch
    quantity: distance
    deprecation: V5.0 replaced by 'in'
  in:
    definition: Distance measured in inches
    unit: inch
    quantity: distance
```

## Quantity file syntax

Defining of quantities is required.
If tooling supports quantity files it can verify that all units provided in unit files
use defined quantities.
For the VSS standard catalog it is required that matching quantities have been defined for all units.

```
  [
    <vss-quantity-identifier>: # Identifier preferably taken from a standard, like ISO 80000
      definition: <string>
      [remark: <string>] # remark as defined in for example ISO 80000
      [comment: <string>]
      [deprecation: <reason>]
  ]*

```


The VSS list of quantities for the standard catalog exists in [quantities.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/quantities.yaml).

### Addition of new Quantities to VSS standard catalog

The [list of quantities](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/quantities.yaml) in VSS standard catalog
is not static. New quantities can be added if needed for units in the VSS standard catalog, or if the VSS-project considers that
the quantity might be useful for custom units. If you would like to propose a new quantity to be added to the list
please create a pull request.

If the quantity is needed for a new unit in the VSS standard catalog you can propose the new quantity and the new unit
in the same Pull Request.

## Defining custom units

It is possible to define custom units in a unit file.
Assume for instance you want to have a signal showing remaining range in [furlong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furlong).
Then you could add an additional unit `furlong`. No need to specify `unit` or `symbol` as they equals the default (i.e. "furlong").
As this unit is not commonly used and not described in any standards, it might be relevant to describe how it can be converted to other units.
That is however only informative, as it a custom unit a downstream implementation supporting unit conversion may not support automatic conversion
of furlong to other units.

```yaml
units:
  furlong:
    definition: Length measured in furlong, 1 furlong equals 201.1680 m
    quantity: length
    allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']
```

Commit message:

Changing unit for mpg (#882)
Based on https://github.com/COVESA/vss-tools/pull/484 we now require unique unit names.
This gives problems here. We could alternatively remove the old mpg unit.

Signed-off-by: Erik Jaegervall <erik.jaegervall@se.bosch.com>

docs-gen/content/rule_set/data_entry/data_units.md, after:

---
title: "Data Units"
date: 2019-08-04T12:36:12+02:00
weight: 20
---

## Introduction to Data Units in VSS

It is in VSS possible for signals to specify a unit of measurement from a list of predefined data units.
For most signals in the VSS standard catalog, a data unit has been selected. A typical example is `Vehicle.Speed`, as shown below.

```yaml
Vehicle.Speed:
  datatype: float
  type: sensor
  unit: km/h
  description: Vehicle speed.
```

The ambition when selecting data unit for signals in VSS standard catalog has been to use either a unit based on SI-units,
or a unit commonly used within the vehicle industry. For the `Vehicle.Speed` example above this means that `km/h` has been selected,
even if `m/s` from an SI-perspective would have been a better choice.

It must be noted that the selected unit does not imply that the value of `Vehicle.Speed` always needs to be sent or visualized
as `km/h` (with float as datatype). A user interface or API may show or request vehicle speed in any unit it likes,
and a transport protocol may send speed in another unit, possibly also involving scaling and offset.
But in protocols not explicitly specifying data units (like [VISS](https://raw.githack.com/w3c/automotive/gh-pages/spec/VISSv2_Core.html))
it is expected that `Vehicle.Speed` is sent and received as `km/h` (without scaling or offset).
However since units define possible `allowed-datatypes` the given `datatype` has to match the allowed ones.

VSS does not offer any syntax for defining alternative units for a specific signal.
The VSS project has specified for all units a corresponding quantity e.g. `velocity` for `km/h`.
An API may use the quantity information to identify alternative units that can be used to represent the signal.
The VSS list of units does not specify conversion factors, so even if VSS list both `km/h` and `m/s` as units for
the quantity `velocity`, it is not specified how they relate to each other.

In some cases it is natural to omit the data unit. This concerns typically signals where datatype `string` is used,
but also signals where the value just represents a number (dimensionless quantities), like in the example below:

```yaml
Vehicle.Cabin.DoorCount:
  datatype: uint8
  type: attribute
  default: 4
  description: Number of doors in vehicle.
```

### Logical Data Units

VSS supports `percent` as data unit, typically with 0 to 100% as the allowed range.
In some cases, the definition on how to calculate the signal value is obvious, like for `Vehicle.Powertrain.FuelSystem.Level`
below. It is likely that all VSS users will calculate fuel level in the same way, i.e. the meaning of a fuel level of 50%
is well agreed, the liters of fuel in the tank is exactly 50% of nominal capacity.

```yaml
Vehicle.Powertrain.FuelSystem.Level:
  datatype: uint8
  type: sensor
  unit: percent
  min: 0
  max: 100
  description: Level in fuel tank as percent of capacity. 0 = empty. 100 = full.

```

In other cases, the formula for calculating the signal is not obvious and is not specified in VSS. A typical example is shown below for clutch wear.
While most VSS users likely can agree that a brand new clutch shall have 0 as "ClutchWear",
the exact formula for calculating clutch wear for a used clutch will likely be vehicle specific.
Some vehicles might monitor actual wear, others might estimate it based on vehicle usage.
This is in VSS called a logical range, a VSS user knows what range to use but are free to define the formula for calculating the value.
Values from different vehicles (of different make/model) can not always be compared, as the formula used for calculation may differ.

```yaml
Vehicle.Powertrain.Transmission.ClutchWear:
  datatype: uint8
  type: sensor
  unit: percent
  max: 100
  description: Clutch wear as percent. 0 = no wear. 100 = worn.
```

## Supported Data Units in VSS Standard Catalog

The VSS syntax does not in itself specify what units can be used, the unit attribute as declared for signals in *.vspec files is optional and can contain an arbitrary string value.
[VSS-Tools](https://github.com/COVESA/vss-tools) however require that all units used are defined
and therefore is also a requirement for signals in the VSS standard catalog.
Units are defined by including them in a unit file with syntax as described below.
One or more unit files can be specified by the `-u` parameter and, if not given, the tools search for a file `units.yaml`
in the same directory as the root *.vspec file.

For the VSS standard catalog the VSS-project has defined a set of units that can be used for signals in the VSS standard catalog.
This list is composed of definitions according to International Units (SI) and few automotive-specific units:
[Specification](https://www.iso.org/standard/30669.html), [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units).
It can be noted that not all units in the list are currently used by the VSS standard catalog,
but they may be used in the future or may be used for customization of the VSS catalog.

The VSS list of units for the standard catalog exists in [units.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml).

### Addition of new Data Units to VSS standard catalog

The [list of units](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml) in VSS standard catalog
is not static. New units can be added if needed for signals in the VSS standard catalog, or if the VSS-project considers that
the unit might be useful for customization of the VSS tree. If you would like to propose a new unit to be added to the list
please create a pull request where the new unit is added to
[units.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/units.yaml).

If the unit is needed for a new signal in the VSS standard catalog you can propose the new signal and the new unit
in the same Pull Request.

## Unit file syntax

Unit files follow the syntax defined below:

```
[
 <vss-unit-identifier>: # Typically unit abbreviation, like km/h or mm, but no special characters
    definition: <string>
    [unit: <string>] # Full name of unit
    quantity: <string> # Quantity of the unit.
    [allowed-datatypes] : ['numeric', 'string', uint8', ...]] # Allowed datatypes in VSS standard catalog
    [deprecation: <reason>]
]*
```

The `vss-unit-identifier` and the string specified as `unit` must be unique.

The VSS term `quantity` corresponds roughly to the term `quantity` as defined in for example ISO 80000.
Typical example are `length`, `mass` and `velocity` that all can be expressed in SI-units.
However, from a VSS perspective quantities do not need to correspond to physical quantities.
It could be an arbitrary term, but it is generally expected that it is possible to convert between values
using different units but defined with the same quantity.

Example:

```yaml
m:
  definition: Length measured in meters
  unit: meter
  quantity: length
  allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']

mm:
  definition: Length measured in millimeters
  unit: millimeter
  quantity: length
  allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']
```

As `m` and `mm` are defined with the same quantity it is expected that you can convert a value from `m` to `mm`.

The `allowed-datatypes` attributes can be used to specify which VSS datatypes can contain values of a particular unit.
For most units the symbolic datatype `numeric` meaning any float or integer datatype can be used.
As an example, both `uint8` and `float` can be used to represent a length value.
If using `uint8` you will have range restrictions, but that might be acceptable for some signals.
For some units more specific datatype restrictions are relevant. Some examples:

* A date/time expressed in ISO 8061 format (`unit: iso8601`) can only be represented as a string
* A UNIX Timestamp signal (`unit: unix-time`) must be at least 32 bit unsigned to be able to handle date/time after year 2038.

The `deprecation` keyword can be used to indicate that a specific unit may be removed in the future.
Tooling shall preferably give a warning if a signal uses a deprecated unit or the unit used belongs to a deprecated quantity.
The reason should preferably list when and why the unit is deprecated, a hypothetical example is given below:

```yaml
  inch:
    definition: Distance measured in inches
    unit: inch (deprecated)
    quantity: distance
    deprecation: V5.0 replaced by 'in'
  in:
    definition: Distance measured in inches
    unit: inch
    quantity: distance
```

Note that in the example above the `unit` field differs for the two signals, as unqiue names must be used.

## Quantity file syntax

Defining of quantities is required.
If tooling supports quantity files it can verify that all units provided in unit files
use defined quantities.
For the VSS standard catalog it is required that matching quantities have been defined for all units.

```
  [
    <vss-quantity-identifier>: # Identifier preferably taken from a standard, like ISO 80000
      definition: <string>
      [remark: <string>] # remark as defined in for example ISO 80000
      [comment: <string>]
      [deprecation: <reason>]
  ]*

```


The VSS list of quantities for the standard catalog exists in [quantities.yaml](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/quantities.yaml).

### Addition of new Quantities to VSS standard catalog

The [list of quantities](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/quantities.yaml) in VSS standard catalog
is not static. New quantities can be added if needed for units in the VSS standard catalog, or if the VSS-project considers that
the quantity might be useful for custom units. If you would like to propose a new quantity to be added to the list
please create a pull request.

If the quantity is needed for a new unit in the VSS standard catalog you can propose the new quantity and the new unit
in the same Pull Request.

## Defining custom units

It is possible to define custom units in a unit file.
Assume for instance you want to have a signal showing remaining range in [furlong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furlong).
Then you could add an additional unit `furlong`. No need to specify `unit` or `symbol` as they equals the default (i.e. "furlong").
As this unit is not commonly used and not described in any standards, it might be relevant to describe how it can be converted to other units.
That is however only informative, as it a custom unit a downstream implementation supporting unit conversion may not support automatic conversion
of furlong to other units.

```yaml
units:
  furlong:
    definition: Length measured in furlong, 1 furlong equals 201.1680 m
    quantity: length
    allowed-datatypes: ['numeric']
```
