docs-gen/content/rule_set/basics.md, before:

---
title: "Basic Rules"
date: 2019-08-04T13:05:11+02:00
weight: 1
---
## Specification format

The Vehicle Signal Specification domain specification consist of *vspec* files.
*vspec* files are YAML files following the rule set defined for VSS.
They also support the use of include directives to refer to other *vspec* files, much like ```#include``` in C/C++. .
Please note that, from a YAML perspective, the include directive is just another comment.

The file [VehicleSignalSpecification.vspec](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/VehicleSignalSpecification.vspec) serves as root
and includes other *vspec* files from the [VSS repository](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification).

The raw specification files can, with help of tools in the [vss-tools repository](https://github.com/COVESA/vss-tools),
be converted to other formats that are more user friendly to read.
Converted representations are also included as release artifacts for each [VSS release](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/releases).

## Addressing Nodes

Tree nodes are addressed, left-to-right, from the root of the tree
toward the node itself. Each element in the name is delimited with
a period ("."). The element hops from the root to the leaf is called ```path```.

For example, the dimming status of the rearview mirror in the cabin is addressed:


    Vehicle.Cabin.RearviewMirror.Dimmed


If there are an array of elements, such as door rows 1-3, they will be
addressed with an index branch:

```
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.Window.Position

Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row2.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row2.Left.Window.Position

Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row3.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row3.Left.Window.Position
```

In a similar fashion, seats are located by row and their left-to-right position.

```
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row1.Pos1.IsBelted  # Left front seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row1.Pos2.IsBelted  # Right front seat

Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos1.IsBelted  # Left rear seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos2.IsBelted  # Middle rear seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos3.IsBelted  # Right rear seat
```

The exact use of ```PosX``` elements and how they correlate to actual
positions in the car, is dependent on the actual vehicle using the
spec.

## Parent Nodes
If a new leaf node is defined, all parent branches included in its name must
be included as well, as shown below:

```
[Signal] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin
[Branch] Vehicle
```

The branches do not have to be defined in any specific order as long
as each branch component is defined somewhere in the vspec file (or an
included vspec file).

## Deprecation `since version 2.1`

During the process of model development, nodes might be
moved or deleted. Giving developers a chance to adopt to the
changes, the original nodes are marked as deprecated with the following rules.

* Nodes, which are moved in the tree or are intended to be removed from the specification are marked with the deprecation keyword.
* The string following the deprecation keyword shall start with the version, when the node was deprecated starting with `V` (e.g. `V2.1`) followed by the reason for deprecation.
* If the node was moved, it shall be indicated by `moved to` followed by the new node name in dot notation as deprecation reason. This keyword shall be used only
if the meta-data of the moved node hasn't changed.
* If the node is intended to be removed from the specification or the meta data changed, it shall be indicated by `removed` and optionally the reason for the removal as deprecation reason.
* Nodes which are deprecated will be removed from the specification, either in the second minor update or, if earlier, the next major update.

### Example
```YAML
Vehicle.Navigation.CurrentLocation:
  type: branch
  description: The current latitude and longitude of the vehicle.
  deprecation: V2.1 moved to Vehicle.CurrentLocation
```

It is recommended for servers, which are implementing protocols for the vehicle signal specification, to serve old and new nodes during the deprecation period described above.

## Style Guide

The VSS specification must adhere to YAML syntax. To keep the standardized VSS specification in this repository consistent the following style guide is provided.

### Naming Conventions

The recommended naming convention for node elements is to use camel case notation starting with a capital letter. It is recommended to use only
`A-Z`, `a-z` and `0-9` in node names. For boolean signals it is recommended to start the name with `Is`.

Examples:

```
SomeBranch.AnotherBranch.MySignalName
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
```
Naming convention for string literals can be found in the [chapter](/vehicle_signal_specification/rule_set/data_entry/allowed)for specifying allowed values.

### Line Length

It is recommended that line length for files in this repository ( e.g. `*.vspec` and `*.md` files) shall not exceed 120 characters. This is not a strict limit, it is e.g. not recommended to split long URLs present in files over multiple lines.

Commit message:

Clarify that VSS is case sensitive. (#569)
This is part of #562.
The idea is that when this has been accepted we can refactor
vss-tools and remove functionality for case-insensitive handling.
(Which by the way is not handled consistently)

Signed-off-by: Erik Jaegervall <erik.jaegervall@se.bosch.com>

docs-gen/content/rule_set/basics.md, after:

---
title: "Basic Rules"
date: 2019-08-04T13:05:11+02:00
weight: 1
---
## Specification format

The Vehicle Signal Specification domain specification consist of *vspec* files.
*vspec* files are YAML files following the rule set defined for VSS.
They also support the use of include directives to refer to other *vspec* files, much like ```#include``` in C/C++. .
Please note that, from a YAML perspective, the include directive is just another comment.

The file [VehicleSignalSpecification.vspec](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/blob/master/spec/VehicleSignalSpecification.vspec) serves as root
and includes other *vspec* files from the [VSS repository](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification).

The raw specification files can, with help of tools in the [vss-tools repository](https://github.com/COVESA/vss-tools),
be converted to other formats that are more user friendly to read.
Converted representations are also included as release artifacts for each [VSS release](https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle_signal_specification/releases).

VSS is in itself case sensitive.
This means that keywords, signal names, types and values normally shall be given with the case specified.
It is however recommended not to take advantage of this and reuse the same name with different case,
as some implementations may treat VSS identifiers as case insensitive.

## Addressing Nodes

Tree nodes are addressed, left-to-right, from the root of the tree
toward the node itself. Each element in the name is delimited with
a period ("."). The element hops from the root to the leaf is called ```path```.

For example, the dimming status of the rearview mirror in the cabin is addressed:


    Vehicle.Cabin.RearviewMirror.Dimmed


If there are an array of elements, such as door rows 1-3, they will be
addressed with an index branch:

```
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.Window.Position

Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row2.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row2.Left.Window.Position

Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row3.Left.IsLocked
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row3.Left.Window.Position
```

In a similar fashion, seats are located by row and their left-to-right position.

```
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row1.Pos1.IsBelted  # Left front seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row1.Pos2.IsBelted  # Right front seat

Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos1.IsBelted  # Left rear seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos2.IsBelted  # Middle rear seat
Vehicle.Cabin.Seat.Row2.Pos3.IsBelted  # Right rear seat
```

The exact use of ```PosX``` elements and how they correlate to actual
positions in the car, is dependent on the actual vehicle using the
spec.

## Parent Nodes
If a new leaf node is defined, all parent branches included in its name must
be included as well, as shown below:

```
[Signal] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin.Door
[Branch] Vehicle.Cabin
[Branch] Vehicle
```

The branches do not have to be defined in any specific order as long
as each branch component is defined somewhere in the vspec file (or an
included vspec file).

## Deprecation `since version 2.1`

During the process of model development, nodes might be
moved or deleted. Giving developers a chance to adopt to the
changes, the original nodes are marked as deprecated with the following rules.

* Nodes, which are moved in the tree or are intended to be removed from the specification are marked with the deprecation keyword.
* The string following the deprecation keyword shall start with the version, when the node was deprecated starting with `V` (e.g. `V2.1`) followed by the reason for deprecation.
* If the node was moved, it shall be indicated by `moved to` followed by the new node name in dot notation as deprecation reason. This keyword shall be used only
if the meta-data of the moved node hasn't changed.
* If the node is intended to be removed from the specification or the meta data changed, it shall be indicated by `removed` and optionally the reason for the removal as deprecation reason.
* Nodes which are deprecated will be removed from the specification, either in the second minor update or, if earlier, the next major update.

### Example
```YAML
Vehicle.Navigation.CurrentLocation:
  type: branch
  description: The current latitude and longitude of the vehicle.
  deprecation: V2.1 moved to Vehicle.CurrentLocation
```

It is recommended for servers, which are implementing protocols for the vehicle signal specification, to serve old and new nodes during the deprecation period described above.

## Style Guide

The VSS specification must adhere to YAML syntax. To keep the standardized VSS specification in this repository consistent the following style guide is provided.

### Naming Conventions

The recommended naming convention for node elements is to use camel case notation starting with a capital letter. It is recommended to use only
`A-Z`, `a-z` and `0-9` in node names. For boolean signals it is recommended to start the name with `Is`.

Examples:

```
SomeBranch.AnotherBranch.MySignalName
Vehicle.Cabin.Door.Row1.Left.IsLocked
```
Naming convention for string literals can be found in the [chapter](/vehicle_signal_specification/rule_set/data_entry/allowed)for specifying allowed values.

### Line Length

It is recommended that line length for files in this repository ( e.g. `*.vspec` and `*.md` files) shall not exceed 120 characters. This is not a strict limit, it is e.g. not recommended to split long URLs present in files over multiple lines.
